Adding new Live Debugger doc (#28365)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/live_debugger/_index.md

---
title: Live Debugger
further_reading:
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Dynamic Instrumentation"
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/expression-language/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Dynamic Instrumentation Expression Language"
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/sensitive-data-scrubbing/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Sensitive Data Scrubbing"
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/symdb/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Autocomplete and Search (Preview)"
- link: "/tracing/error_tracking/execution_replay"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Execution Replay"
---

## Overview

> Live Debugger enables you to debug production applications without redeploying code or interrupting service. Built on Datadog's [Dynamic Instrumentation][1] capabilities, Live Debugger allows you to inspect and troubleshoot code behavior in real-time. Start a Debug Session by adding a group of auto-expiring logs and variable snapshots anywhere in your application code. 
> 
> Live Debugger logs function as "non-breaking breakpoints" that gather vital information from running applications without halting their execution. This makes it particularly valuable for diagnosing issues in environments where traditional debugging methods are impractical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Live Debugger helps you debug production applications without redeploying code or interrupting service. It uses Datadog's [Dynamic Instrumentation][1] to inspect and troubleshoot code behavior in real-time. Start a Debug Session by adding auto-expiring logs and variable snapshots anywhere in your application code.

These logs function as "non-breaking breakpoints" that collect vital information from running applications without stopping execution. This makes Live Debugger ideal for diagnosing issues in environments where traditional debugging methods aren't practical.
```

## Key capabilities

> Live Debugger provides the following capabilities:
> 
> * **Real-time inspection**: Examine variable states, method arguments, and execution paths in running production code.
> * **Non-invasive debugging**: Collect debugging information without stopping application execution or degrading performance.
> * **Code instrumentation**: Add logs to any location in your code, including third-party libraries.
> * **Auto-expiring logs**: Logs created in Debug Sessions expire automatically after a fixed time period (default 60 minutes), preventing unnecessary data accumulation.
> * **Conditional execution**: Configure logs to execute only when specific conditions are met using [expression language][2].
> * **Sensitive data protection**: Built-in [sensitive data scrubbing][3] prevents accidental exposure of personal information, passwords, and secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Live Debugger provides:

* **Real-time inspection**: Examine variable states, method arguments, and execution paths in running code.
* **Non-invasive debugging**: Collect debugging information without stopping applications or degrading performance.
* **Code instrumentation**: Add logs to any location in your code, including third-party libraries.
* **Auto-expiring logs**: Logs created in Debug Sessions expire automatically after a set time (default 60 minutes).
* **Conditional execution**: Configure logs to execute only when specific conditions are met.
* **Sensitive data protection**: Built-in data scrubbing prevents exposure of personal information, passwords, and secrets.
```

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

1. Live Debugger requires the [same prerequisites][16] as Dynamic Instrumentation.

> 2. Create a logs index to store the debugging information ([see instructions][19]).
> 3. (Recommended) Enable [Source Code Integration][20] to view and select specific code locations when adding logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a logs index to store debugging information ([see instructions][19]).
3. (Recommended) Enable [Source Code Integration][20] to view and select specific code locations.
```

### Setup Live Debugger

Enable Live Debugger on a service using one of these methods:

**One-click enablement (Recommended)**
- Select the service and environment on the [Live Debugger Settings][18] page.

> - Ensure all prerequisites are met (unmet requirements display on the [Settings][18] page).
> - Enable Live Debugger (and Dynamic Instrumentation simultaneously) by clicking the "Enable" button.
> - One-click enablement does not require the service to be restarted before using Live Debugger.
> - Note:
>     - Only users with eligible permissions have access to use one-click enablement.
>     - For security, users may need to re-authenticate before using one-click enablement. Admin and security contacts in the organization receive an email notification when a new service and environment are enabled via one-click enablement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that all prerequisites are met (unmet requirements display on the Settings page).
- Click "Enable" to activate Live Debugger (and Dynamic Instrumentation).
- No service restart is required.
- Note:
    - Only users with eligible permissions can use one-click enablement.
    - Users may need to re-authenticate before using this feature.
    - Admins and security contacts receive email notifications when new services are enabled.
```

**Manual enablement**
- Select the service and environment on the [Live Debugger Settings][18] page.

> - Ensure all prerequisites are met (unmet requirements display on the [Settings][18] page).
> - Follow the instructions on the [Settings][18] page to enable Live Debugger (and Dynamic Instrumentation simultaneously).
> - Manual enablement requires restarting the service before using Live Debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that all prerequisites are met.
- Follow the instructions to enable Live Debugger.
- Restart the service before using Live Debugger.
```

## Key capabilities

Live Debugger provides:

- **Real-time inspection** of variable states, method arguments, and execution paths in running code.
- **Non-invasive data collection** that captures debugging information without stopping applications or degrading performance.
- **Code instrumentation** with logpoints that can be added anywhere in your code, including third-party libraries.
- **Auto-expiring logpoints** that are automatically removed after a set time (default: 48 hours).
- **Conditional logging** based on user-defined criteria to capture data only when specific conditions are met.
- **Built-in [sensitive data scrubbing][3]** to prevent exposure of personal information, passwords, and secrets.

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

1. All [Dynamic Instrumentation prerequisites][16] are met.

> 2. (For one-click enablement) You have the following permissions: **Org Management**, **APM Remote Configuration Write**.

Author: @shatzi Just triple checking these additional permissions are correct!

Enabling Live Debugger and Dynamic Instrumentation on a service does not trigger any data capture or performance impact by itself. Data capture only begins and continues while there are active Debug Sessions or dynamic instrumentations on that service.

**Performance Impact**: Datadog's agent-driven instrumentation ensures minimal impact on application performance. Sampling logic, rate limits, and built-in budgets prevent runaway data capture. The system limits logs with variable capture to 1 per second, while logs without variable capture are allowed a higher sampling rate (due to less overhead).

**Pricing Impact**: Logs captured by Datadog are all billed the same way, whether they are generated from Live Debugger or logger lines in your source code. With Live Debugger, the logpoints automatically expire after the set time period, limiting unnecessary data accumulation and costs. Monitor your Datadog Plan & Usage page for any unexpected increases after utilizing a new feature.

## Using Live Debugger

### Creating and using a Debug Session

Debug Sessions let you inspect your code at runtime with auto-expiring logpoints. To create and use a Debug Session:

> 1. From the Live Debugger page, click **Create Debug Session**.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Start a Debug Session from one of the following:
    - [Live Debugger page][14]: click **Create Debug Session**
    - (Requires Code Origins feature) APM Traces: click **Start Debug Session** on a specific span's Code Origin section 
```

2. Add the first logpoint to start the session.
3. Add, remove, and modify logpoints within the session.

> 4. Add logpoints within the same session across multiple services.

Author: I'll remove (4) for now - it's not actually that important to call out specifically here. FYR though, it's saying that the user can add logpoints to code files from multiple applications/services/repos within the same debug session. So they can see logs coming in from multiple services at once.

> 4. Add logpoints within the same session across multiple services.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Debug Sessions automatically expire after 48 hours. You can manually disable and re-enable both sessions and individual logpoints at any time.

> Start Debug Sessions from:
> - Live Debugger page
> - APM Traces (requires Code Origins feature) by clicking **Start Debug Session** on a specific span's Code Origins section

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Creating logpoints

Logpoints are "non-breaking breakpoints" that specify where in the code to capture information, what data to include, and under what conditions. To add a logpoint for debugging:

1. Go to the [Live Debugger page][14].
2. Click **Create Debug Session**.
3. Choose your service, environment, and select where in your code to place the first logpoint.
4. Define a logpoint message template using the [Dynamic Instrumentation expression language][2].

> 5. Optionally enable "Capture Variables" to collect all execution context (this feature is rate-limited to 1 hit per second).

Author: Ah no, "match" doesn't sound quite right.. We could just use "log" (ie. 1 log per second). 

@OmerRaviv What's a good alternative word?

> 5. Optionally enable "Capture Variables" to collect all execution context (this feature is rate-limited to 1 hit per second).

Author: @OmerRaviv Nevermind! Updated to "execution" (ie. 1 execution per second)

6. Optionally, define a condition for when the logs should be emitted.

> Note: Some feature limitations may apply depending on the service's runtime language. See the specific Dynamic Instrumentation [runtime language page][17] for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** Some feature limitations may apply depending on the service's runtime language. Review the [runtime language-specific documentation][17] for more details.
```

> ## Protecting sensitive data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Protecting sensitive data
```

Live Debugger data might contain sensitive information, especially when using the "Capture Variables" option. To protect this data:

1. Use Dynamic Instrumentation's built-in [sensitive data scrubbing][3] mechanisms.
2. Use [Sensitive Data Scanner][15] to identify and redact sensitive information based on regular expressions.

> ## Limitations
> 
> - Live Debugger supports the [same runtime languages][17] as Dynamic Instrumentation.
> - Live Debugger and Dynamic Instrumentation are enabled and disabled for the <a href="#relationship-between-live-debugger-and-dynamic-instrumentation">same service and environment</a>.
> - Logpoints with variable enabled are rate-limited to 1 hit per second.
> - Logpoints without variable capture are rate-limited to 5000 executions per second per service instance.
> - Debug Sessions expire after 48 hours (this is not customizable for now).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Limitations

The following constraints apply to Live Debugger usage and configuration:

- **Language support:** Live Debugger is available for the same runtime languages as [Dynamic Instrumentation][1].
- **Configuration scope:** Live Debugger and Dynamic Instrumentation are enabled or disabled together for the same service and environment.
- **Rate limits:**
   - Logpoints with variable capture: Limited to 1 match per second.
   - Logpoints without variable capture: Limited to 5000 executions per second, per service instance.
- **Session duration:** Debug Sessions automatically expire after 48 hours. This limit is not currently configurable.
```

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /dynamic_instrumentation/
[2]: /dynamic_instrumentation/expression-language/
[3]: /dynamic_instrumentation/sensitive-data-scrubbing/
[4]: /agent/
[5]: /agent/remote_config/
[6]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-java
[7]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-py
[8]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-dotnet
[9]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-js
[10]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-rb
[11]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-php
[12]: /getting_started/tagging/unified_service_tagging/
[13]: https://app.datadoghq.com/dynamic-instrumentation/setup
[14]: https://app.datadoghq.com/debugging/sessions
[15]: /security/sensitive_data_scanner/ 
[16]: /dynamic_instrumentation/#prerequisites
[17]: /dynamic_instrumentation/enabling

> [18]: /debugging/settings

Author: Thanks for catching that!
